documents/OBSERVABILITY-IMPLEMENTATION-SUMMARY.md, before:

# VajraPulse Observability Stack - Implementation Summary

**Date**: November 16, 2025  
**Status**: ✅ **COMPLETE & OPERATIONAL**  
**Branch**: `phase1-opentelemetry-exporter`

---

## 🎯 What Was Built

A complete, production-ready observability stack for VajraPulse load testing with:

1. **OpenTelemetry Collector** (v0.115.1) - OTLP metrics receiver
2. **Prometheus** (v3.0.1) - Time-series metrics storage  
3. **Grafana** (v11.4.0) - Pre-configured dashboards
4. **Auto-provisioning** - Zero manual configuration needed
5. **Comprehensive documentation** - Quick start + detailed guides

---

## 📊 Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐  OTLP gRPC    ┌──────────────────┐  Prometheus   ┌────────────┐
│  VajraPulse │──────────────▶│ OTEL Collector   │──────────────▶│ Prometheus │
│ Load Tests  │  port 4317    │  (0.115.1)       │  scrape       │  (3.0.1)   │
└─────────────┘               │                  │  /metrics     └─────┬──────┘
                              │ - Receives OTLP  │                     │
                              │ - Adds metadata  │                     │
                              │ - Exports Prom   │                     │
                              └──────────────────┘                     │
                                                                       │
                              ┌──────────────────┐  Query API          │
                              │    Grafana       │◀────────────────────┘
                              │    (11.4.0)      │
                              │                  │
                              │ - Dashboards     │
                              │ - Auto-refresh   │
                              │ - Provisioned    │
                              └──────────────────┘
                                     │
                                     ▼
                              Browser: localhost:3000
                              Credentials: admin/vajrapulse
```

---

## 🚀 Key Features

### Automated Setup
- ✅ Single `docker-compose up -d` command
- ✅ All services auto-configured
- ✅ Grafana datasource pre-provisioned
- ✅ Dashboard automatically loaded
- ✅ No manual steps required

### Comprehensive Dashboard

**Panels Included**:
1. **Execution Rate** (time series)
   - Total executions per minute
   - Success rate per minute
   - Failure rate per minute

2. **Success Rate Gauge**
   - Real-time percentage
   - Color-coded thresholds:
     - Red: < 80%
     - Orange: 80-95%
     - Yellow: 95-99%
     - Green: ≥ 99%

3. **Execution Counts** (stats)
   - Total cumulative
   - Successful cumulative
   - Failed cumulative

4. **Success Latency Percentiles** (time series)
   - P50, P90, P95, P99
   - Smooth interpolation
   - Historical trend view

5. **Failure Latency Percentiles** (time series)
   - Same percentiles for failures
   - Only shown when failures occur

6. **Task Metadata Table**
   - Task name and tags
   - Service information
   - Environment details
   - Resource attributes

**Dashboard Features**:
- ⏱️ Auto-refresh: 5 seconds
- 📅 Default range: Last 15 minutes
- 🔄 Refresh intervals: 5s, 10s, 30s, 1m, 5m
- 🏷️ Tags: vajrapulse, load-testing, performance

### Task Identity Integration

Metrics are tagged with task metadata:

```java
TaskIdentity identity = new TaskIdentity(
    "http-load-test",
    Map.of(
        "scenario", "baseline",
        "component", "http-client"
    )
);
```

**Emitted Labels**:
- `task_name`: "http-load-test"
- `task_scenario`: "baseline"
- `task_component`: "http-client"
- Plus all resource attributes (service.name, environment, etc.)

### Metrics Exported

| Metric | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `vajrapulse_execution_count` | Counter | Count of task executions, with `status=success|failure` |
| `vajrapulse_execution_duration` | Histogram | Execution duration values in ms, with `status` and `percentile` attributes |
| `vajrapulse_success_rate` | Gauge | Success percentage (0-100) |

---

## 📁 Files Created/Modified

### Configuration Files
```
examples/http-load-test/
├── docker-compose.yml              ✨ Enhanced with 3-service stack
├── otel-collector-config.yml       ✨ Updated Prometheus exporter config
├── prometheus.yml                  ✅ NEW - Scrape configuration
├── verify-stack.sh                 ✅ NEW - Health check script
├── OBSERVABILITY-STACK.md          ✅ NEW - Comprehensive docs
└── QUICKSTART.md                   ✅ NEW - 2-minute setup guide
```

### Grafana Provisioning
```
examples/http-load-test/grafana/
├── provisioning/
│   ├── datasources/
│   │   └── prometheus.yml          ✅ NEW - Auto-provision Prometheus
│   └── dashboards/
│       └── vajrapulse.yml          ✅ NEW - Dashboard provider config
└── dashboards/
    └── vajrapulse-dashboard.json   ✅ NEW - Pre-built dashboard (6 panels)
```

### Example Integration
```
examples/http-load-test/src/main/java/com/example/http/
└── HttpLoadTestOtelRunner.java     ✨ Updated with TaskIdentity
```

---

## 🔧 Service Endpoints

| Service | Endpoint | Purpose |
|---------|----------|---------|
| **Grafana** | http://localhost:3000 | Dashboards (admin/vajrapulse) |
| **Prometheus** | http://localhost:9090 | Query interface |
| **OTEL Collector (gRPC)** | http://localhost:4317 | OTLP receiver |
| **OTEL Collector (HTTP)** | http://localhost:4318 | OTLP receiver (HTTP/1.1) |
| **OTEL Metrics Endpoint** | http://localhost:8889/metrics | Raw Prometheus format |

---

## ✅ Verification Steps Completed

1. ✅ Started full stack with `docker-compose up -d`
2. ✅ All 3 containers running and healthy
3. ✅ Ran load test with `./gradlew :examples:http-load-test:runOtel`
4. ✅ Verified metrics in Prometheus: `vajrapulse_executions_total` = 16,214
5. ✅ Verified Grafana dashboard auto-provisioned
6. ✅ Confirmed task identity tags present in metrics
7. ✅ Health check script working: `./verify-stack.sh`

---

## 🎓 Usage Examples

### Basic Test Run
```bash
# Start stack
cd examples/http-load-test
docker-compose up -d

# Run test
cd ../..
./gradlew :examples:http-load-test:runOtel

# View dashboard
open http://localhost:3000
# Login: admin / vajrapulse
```

### Custom Task Identity
```java
TaskIdentity identity = new TaskIdentity(
    "checkout-flow",
    Map.of(
        "scenario", "black-friday",
        "component", "payment-gateway",
        "region", "us-east"
    )
);
```

### Prometheus Queries
```promql
# Total execution rate (per minute) by task
sum by (task_name) (rate(vajrapulse_execution_count[1m])) * 60

# Success/failure rates (per minute)
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="success"}[1m]) * 60
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="failure"}[1m]) * 60

# Success rate by task (gauge)
vajrapulse_success_rate{task_name="http-load-test"}

# P95 duration (ms) for successes (pre-aggregated percentile series)
vajrapulse_execution_duration{status="success", percentile="0.95"}

# Failures by scenario (per minute)
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="failure", task_scenario="baseline"}[5m])
```

---

## 🎯 Configuration Highlights

### OTEL Collector
- **Receivers**: OTLP gRPC (4317) + HTTP (4318)
- **Processors**: memory_limiter, attributes, batch
- **Exporters**: debug, file, **prometheus**
- **Features**: 
  - Resource-to-telemetry conversion enabled
  - Deployment metadata injection
  - OpenMetrics format support

### Prometheus
- **Scrape interval**: 5 seconds
- **Retention**: 7 days
- **Targets**: OTEL Collector (localhost:8889)
- **External labels**: cluster=vajrapulse-local

### Grafana
- **Version**: 11.4.0
- **Auth**: Default admin + anonymous viewer access
- **Analytics**: Disabled
- **Auto-provision**: Datasource + dashboards
- **Refresh**: Every 5 seconds

---

## 🐛 Known Issues & Solutions

### Issue: Double "vajrapulse" Prefix
**Problem**: Initial config had metrics named `vajrapulse_vajrapulse_executions_total`  
**Solution**: Removed `namespace: vajrapulse` from Prometheus exporter config  
**Status**: ✅ Fixed

### Issue: OTEL Collector Healthcheck
**Problem**: Container marked unhealthy (no standard health endpoint)  
**Solution**: Removed healthcheck, use port check instead  
**Status**: ✅ Fixed

### Issue: Gauge Multiple Values Warning
**Problem**: `vajrapulse.success.rate` recording multiple values warning  
**Solution**: This is expected behavior for callback gauges; harmless  
**Status**: ℹ️ Informational only

---

## 📊 Test Results

### Load Test Execution
- **Duration**: 30 seconds
- **TPS**: 100
- **Total Requests**: ~3,000 per test run
- **Success Rate**: 99.68% (13,288 success / 43 failures)
- **Latency**: Sub-millisecond for mock HTTP responses

### Stack Performance
- **Startup Time**: ~30 seconds (all services)
- **Metrics Delay**: <10 seconds (OTLP → Prometheus)
- **Dashboard Refresh**: 5 seconds
- **Memory Usage**: 
  - OTEL Collector: ~50 MB
  - Prometheus: ~100 MB
  - Grafana: ~150 MB

---

## 🚀 Production Readiness

### Security Checklist
- ⚠️ Change default Grafana password
- ⚠️ Disable anonymous access in production
- ⚠️ Enable TLS for OTLP endpoints
- ⚠️ Add authentication to Prometheus
- ⚠️ Use secrets management for credentials

### Scaling Recommendations
- 📈 Prometheus remote write for long-term storage
- 📈 Multiple OTEL Collector instances for HA
- 📈 Grafana HA cluster for production
- 📈 Separate Prometheus per environment

### Monitoring the Monitors
- ✅ Prometheus self-monitoring enabled
- ✅ Collector metrics exposed at :8888
- ✅ Grafana health endpoint available
- ℹ️ Consider adding Alertmanager

---

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| **QUICKSTART.md** | 2-minute setup guide |
| **OBSERVABILITY-STACK.md** | Comprehensive reference |
| **verify-stack.sh** | Health check automation |
| **METRICS_TAGGING_GUIDE.md** | TaskIdentity usage |

---

## 🎉 Summary

**What You Get**:
- Complete observability in <2 minutes
- Production-grade metrics pipeline
- Beautiful, pre-configured dashboards
- Task-level metric tagging
- Zero manual configuration

**Next Steps**:
1. Run multiple tests and watch metrics
2. Customize dashboard panels
3. Set up Grafana alerts
4. Add more task identities
5. Configure remote storage for Prometheus

**Status**: Ready for production use! 🚀

---

**Commits**:
- `5c24f97`: feat(observability): complete stack with OTEL Collector, Prometheus, and Grafana
- `f6f34a8`: docs(observability): add quick start guide for 2-minute setup

**Branch**: `phase1-opentelemetry-exporter`

Commit message:

exporter: adopt semantic conventions fully
- Unify counters: vajrapulse.execution.count with status label
- Switch duration percentiles to async gauge vajrapulse.execution.duration (status, percentile)
- Translate resource attribute keys (environment→deployment.environment, region→cloud.region)

docs+tools:
- Update Grafana dashboard queries to new metrics
- Update observability docs and verify script to new names and guidance

documents/OBSERVABILITY-IMPLEMENTATION-SUMMARY.md, after:

# VajraPulse Observability Stack - Implementation Summary

**Date**: November 16, 2025  
**Status**: ✅ **COMPLETE & OPERATIONAL**  
**Branch**: `phase1-opentelemetry-exporter`

---

## 🎯 What Was Built

A complete, production-ready observability stack for VajraPulse load testing with:

1. **OpenTelemetry Collector** (v0.115.1) - OTLP metrics receiver
2. **Prometheus** (v3.0.1) - Time-series metrics storage  
3. **Grafana** (v11.4.0) - Pre-configured dashboards
4. **Auto-provisioning** - Zero manual configuration needed
5. **Comprehensive documentation** - Quick start + detailed guides

---

## 📊 Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐  OTLP gRPC    ┌──────────────────┐  Prometheus   ┌────────────┐
│  VajraPulse │──────────────▶│ OTEL Collector   │──────────────▶│ Prometheus │
│ Load Tests  │  port 4317    │  (0.115.1)       │  scrape       │  (3.0.1)   │
└─────────────┘               │                  │  /metrics     └─────┬──────┘
                              │ - Receives OTLP  │                     │
                              │ - Adds metadata  │                     │
                              │ - Exports Prom   │                     │
                              └──────────────────┘                     │
                                                                       │
                              ┌──────────────────┐  Query API          │
                              │    Grafana       │◀────────────────────┘
                              │    (11.4.0)      │
                              │                  │
                              │ - Dashboards     │
                              │ - Auto-refresh   │
                              │ - Provisioned    │
                              └──────────────────┘
                                     │
                                     ▼
                              Browser: localhost:3000
                              Credentials: admin/vajrapulse
```

---

## 🚀 Key Features

### Automated Setup
- ✅ Single `docker-compose up -d` command
- ✅ All services auto-configured
- ✅ Grafana datasource pre-provisioned
- ✅ Dashboard automatically loaded
- ✅ No manual steps required

### Comprehensive Dashboard

**Panels Included**:
1. **Execution Rate** (time series)
   - Total executions per minute
   - Success rate per minute
   - Failure rate per minute

2. **Success Rate Gauge**
   - Real-time percentage
   - Color-coded thresholds:
     - Red: < 80%
     - Orange: 80-95%
     - Yellow: 95-99%
     - Green: ≥ 99%

3. **Execution Counts** (stats)
   - Total cumulative
   - Successful cumulative
   - Failed cumulative

4. **Success Latency Percentiles** (time series)
   - P50, P90, P95, P99
   - Smooth interpolation
   - Historical trend view

5. **Failure Latency Percentiles** (time series)
   - Same percentiles for failures
   - Only shown when failures occur

6. **Task Metadata Table**
   - Task name and tags
   - Service information
   - Environment details
   - Resource attributes

**Dashboard Features**:
- ⏱️ Auto-refresh: 5 seconds
- 📅 Default range: Last 15 minutes
- 🔄 Refresh intervals: 5s, 10s, 30s, 1m, 5m
- 🏷️ Tags: vajrapulse, load-testing, performance

### Task Identity Integration

Metrics are tagged with task metadata:

```java
TaskIdentity identity = new TaskIdentity(
    "http-load-test",
    Map.of(
        "scenario", "baseline",
        "component", "http-client"
    )
);
```

**Emitted Labels**:
- `task_name`: "http-load-test"
- `task_scenario`: "baseline"
- `task_component`: "http-client"
- Plus all resource attributes (service.name, environment, etc.)

### Metrics Exported

| Metric | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `vajrapulse_execution_count` | Counter | Count of task executions, with `status=success|failure` |
| `vajrapulse_execution_duration` | Gauge | Execution duration percentiles (ms), with `status` and `percentile` attributes |
| `vajrapulse_success_rate` | Gauge | Success percentage (0-100) |

---

## 📁 Files Created/Modified

### Configuration Files
```
examples/http-load-test/
├── docker-compose.yml              ✨ Enhanced with 3-service stack
├── otel-collector-config.yml       ✨ Updated Prometheus exporter config
├── prometheus.yml                  ✅ NEW - Scrape configuration
├── verify-stack.sh                 ✅ NEW - Health check script
├── OBSERVABILITY-STACK.md          ✅ NEW - Comprehensive docs
└── QUICKSTART.md                   ✅ NEW - 2-minute setup guide
```

### Grafana Provisioning
```
examples/http-load-test/grafana/
├── provisioning/
│   ├── datasources/
│   │   └── prometheus.yml          ✅ NEW - Auto-provision Prometheus
│   └── dashboards/
│       └── vajrapulse.yml          ✅ NEW - Dashboard provider config
└── dashboards/
    └── vajrapulse-dashboard.json   ✅ NEW - Pre-built dashboard (6 panels)
```

### Example Integration
```
examples/http-load-test/src/main/java/com/example/http/
└── HttpLoadTestOtelRunner.java     ✨ Updated with TaskIdentity
```

---

## 🔧 Service Endpoints

| Service | Endpoint | Purpose |
|---------|----------|---------|
| **Grafana** | http://localhost:3000 | Dashboards (admin/vajrapulse) |
| **Prometheus** | http://localhost:9090 | Query interface |
| **OTEL Collector (gRPC)** | http://localhost:4317 | OTLP receiver |
| **OTEL Collector (HTTP)** | http://localhost:4318 | OTLP receiver (HTTP/1.1) |
| **OTEL Metrics Endpoint** | http://localhost:8889/metrics | Raw Prometheus format |

---

## ✅ Verification Steps Completed

1. ✅ Started full stack with `docker-compose up -d`
2. ✅ All 3 containers running and healthy
3. ✅ Ran load test with `./gradlew :examples:http-load-test:runOtel`
4. ✅ Verified metrics in Prometheus: `vajrapulse_execution_count` present with `status` labels
5. ✅ Verified Grafana dashboard auto-provisioned
6. ✅ Confirmed task identity tags present in metrics
7. ✅ Health check script working: `./verify-stack.sh`

---

## 🎓 Usage Examples

### Basic Test Run
```bash
# Start stack
cd examples/http-load-test
docker-compose up -d

# Run test
cd ../..
./gradlew :examples:http-load-test:runOtel

# View dashboard
open http://localhost:3000
# Login: admin / vajrapulse
```

### Custom Task Identity
```java
TaskIdentity identity = new TaskIdentity(
    "checkout-flow",
    Map.of(
        "scenario", "black-friday",
        "component", "payment-gateway",
        "region", "us-east"
    )
);
```

### Prometheus Queries
```promql
# Total execution rate (per minute) by task
sum by (task_name) (rate(vajrapulse_execution_count[1m])) * 60

# Success/failure rates (per minute)
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="success"}[1m]) * 60
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="failure"}[1m]) * 60

# Success rate by task (gauge)
vajrapulse_success_rate{task_name="http-load-test"}

# P95 duration (ms) for successes (pre-aggregated percentile series)
vajrapulse_execution_duration{status="success", percentile="0.95"}

# Failures by scenario (per minute)
rate(vajrapulse_execution_count{status="failure", task_scenario="baseline"}[5m])
```

---

## 🎯 Configuration Highlights

### OTEL Collector
- **Receivers**: OTLP gRPC (4317) + HTTP (4318)
- **Processors**: memory_limiter, attributes, batch
- **Exporters**: debug, file, **prometheus**
- **Features**: 
  - Resource-to-telemetry conversion enabled
  - Deployment metadata injection
  - OpenMetrics format support

### Prometheus
- **Scrape interval**: 5 seconds
- **Retention**: 7 days
- **Targets**: OTEL Collector (localhost:8889)
- **External labels**: cluster=vajrapulse-local

### Grafana
- **Version**: 11.4.0
- **Auth**: Default admin + anonymous viewer access
- **Analytics**: Disabled
- **Auto-provision**: Datasource + dashboards
- **Refresh**: Every 5 seconds

---

## 🐛 Known Issues & Solutions

### Issue: Double "vajrapulse" Prefix
**Problem**: Initial config had metrics named `vajrapulse_vajrapulse_executions_total`  
**Solution**: Removed `namespace: vajrapulse` from Prometheus exporter config  
**Status**: ✅ Fixed

### Issue: OTEL Collector Healthcheck
**Problem**: Container marked unhealthy (no standard health endpoint)  
**Solution**: Removed healthcheck, use port check instead  
**Status**: ✅ Fixed

### Issue: Gauge Multiple Values Warning
**Problem**: `vajrapulse.success.rate` recording multiple values warning  
**Solution**: This is expected behavior for callback gauges; harmless  
**Status**: ℹ️ Informational only

---

## 📊 Test Results

### Load Test Execution
- **Duration**: 30 seconds
- **TPS**: 100
- **Total Requests**: ~3,000 per test run
- **Success Rate**: 99.68% (13,288 success / 43 failures)
- **Latency**: Sub-millisecond for mock HTTP responses

### Stack Performance
- **Startup Time**: ~30 seconds (all services)
- **Metrics Delay**: <10 seconds (OTLP → Prometheus)
- **Dashboard Refresh**: 5 seconds
- **Memory Usage**: 
  - OTEL Collector: ~50 MB
  - Prometheus: ~100 MB
  - Grafana: ~150 MB

---

## 🚀 Production Readiness

### Security Checklist
- ⚠️ Change default Grafana password
- ⚠️ Disable anonymous access in production
- ⚠️ Enable TLS for OTLP endpoints
- ⚠️ Add authentication to Prometheus
- ⚠️ Use secrets management for credentials

### Scaling Recommendations
- 📈 Prometheus remote write for long-term storage
- 📈 Multiple OTEL Collector instances for HA
- 📈 Grafana HA cluster for production
- 📈 Separate Prometheus per environment

### Monitoring the Monitors
- ✅ Prometheus self-monitoring enabled
- ✅ Collector metrics exposed at :8888
- ✅ Grafana health endpoint available
- ℹ️ Consider adding Alertmanager

---

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| **QUICKSTART.md** | 2-minute setup guide |
| **OBSERVABILITY-STACK.md** | Comprehensive reference |
| **verify-stack.sh** | Health check automation |
| **METRICS_TAGGING_GUIDE.md** | TaskIdentity usage |

---

## 🎉 Summary

**What You Get**:
- Complete observability in <2 minutes
- Production-grade metrics pipeline
- Beautiful, pre-configured dashboards
- Task-level metric tagging
- Zero manual configuration

**Next Steps**:
1. Run multiple tests and watch metrics
2. Customize dashboard panels
3. Set up Grafana alerts
4. Add more task identities
5. Configure remote storage for Prometheus

**Status**: Ready for production use! 🚀

---

**Commits**:
- `5c24f97`: feat(observability): complete stack with OTEL Collector, Prometheus, and Grafana
- `f6f34a8`: docs(observability): add quick start guide for 2-minute setup

**Branch**: `phase1-opentelemetry-exporter`
